---
layout: post
title: Two Books Every Programmer Must Read
---

I have been an Audible subscriber since 2012, I have listened to countless
self-improvement books and some excellent fiction that have kept me up listening
past bedtime.

The self-improvement books often fall in the category of _"I believe what they
are saying, I know what I need to change to improve myself, But I don't end up
changing anything."_

This first book probably only applies to you if you have a smartphone (irony
intended).

[Digital Minimalism](https://www.audible.com/pd/Digital-Minimalism-Audiobook/B07LGF8TCJ?qid=1557151959&sr=1-1&ref=a_search_c3_lProduct_1_1&pf_rd_p=e81b7c27-6880-467a-b5a7-13cef5d729fe&pf_rd_r=ANK88ZNGPDFBB26MN8FB)

The crux of the book is that the little bits of time you spend on your phone
throughout the day while waiting in line or on the toilet is not making you
happier. In fact, it is probably adding a measure of anxiety and depression to
your life and stealing a lot of intimacy from your relationship and killing your
productivity at work.

It was so good that I listened to the other book from the same author:

[Deep Work](https://www.audible.com/pd/Deep-Work-Audiobook/B0189PX1RQ?qid=1557151967&sr=1-1&ref=a_search_c3_lProduct_1_1&pf_rd_p=e81b7c27-6880-467a-b5a7-13cef5d729fe&pf_rd_r=EBDMM5RKHBHCBXQAXQDS)

**Digital Minimalism** will get you some margin back in your day, **Deep Work**
will help you fill it. Some of the most satisfying things a human can do are to
get entirely lost in a difficult task. We are surprisingly bad at gauging what
will make us happy. I used to think that sitting still doing nothing will make
us happy. I used to think that when I am on the toilet if I had to choose
between sitting there bored and reading technology news for 10 minutes, reading
about technology news will make me happier, it will not!

Two concepts to leave you with.

### Attention Training

Your brain is like a puppy. You are training it every day. Sometimes, like
puppies, it notifies you that it is bored, on the toilet or waiting in line
somewhere, if you whip out your phone and reward it with some entertainment, you
are telling it that resisting discomfort is okay behavior that will be rewarded
with instant entertainment. When you are having an authentic conversation with
someone you love or when you are in the middle of solving a challenging problem
with code, your brain will keep up its lousy behavior of wanting to be pacified
with some entertainment. Fighting off the temptation of distraction will rob you
of genuinely focusing on what is most important to you, even if you manage to
resist giving in. Part of the answer is to just let yourself be bored in the
small moments in the day, this will build the attention capacity for your brain
to perform when you need it.

### Attention Residue

When you take a break from, meaningful, challenging, enjoyable, creative work (I
love how programming fits all of these so well), what do you spend your break
on? Do you give your attention to attention-merchants? (someone who sells your
attention to others, in the form of ads). If you spend that break on getting
input from someone else's thoughts, through email, browsing the internet,
checking social media, anything that wants to grab at your attention, that thing
you paid attention to, leaves a residue on your mind when you try to go back to
work. Try to arrange your day so that all of your creative work (Programming for
me) is done in one or two big chunks, where you only take breaks that do not
pull your attention to something else. My breaks are only for food, toilet, or a
brisk walk (I will jump into a good conversation when it presents itself because
for me it's worth the cost). Stay away from anything that can be an attention
trap. You want to focus only on the work for this entire time with no
distractions, even during breaks. If this sounds like it might make you
productive but miserable, please try it and let me know in the comments. It has
made me more productive and happier.
